In this sequence of lectures,
we're going to learn Asymptotic Analysis.
This is the language, by which every
serious computer programmer and
computer scientist, discusses, the high
level performance, of computer algorithms.
As such, it's a totally, crucial, topic.
In this video, the plan is to segueway
between the high level discussion that
you've already seen in
the course introduction.
And the mathematical formalism
which we're going to start
developing in the next video.
Before getting into that
mathematical formalism,
however, I want to make sure that
the topic is well motivated.
That you have solid intuition for
what it's trying to accomplish, and
also that you've seen a couple of simple,
intuitive examples.
Let's get started.
Asymptotic analysis provides
basic vocabulary for
discussing the design and
analysis of algorithms.
And while it is a mathematical concept,
it is by no means math for math's sake.
You will very frequently hear serious
programmers saying that such and such code
runs in o of n time where such and such
other code runs in o of n squared time.
It's important you know what programmers
mean when they make statements like that.
The reason this vocabulary is so
ubiquitous is that it identifies a sweet
spot for discussing the high
level performance of algorithms.
What I mean by that,
is it is on the one hand,
coarse enough, to suppress all of
the details that you want to ignore.
Details that depend on
the choice of architecture,
the choice of programming language,
the choice of compiler, and so on.
On the other hand it's
sharp enough to be useful.
In particular,
to make predictive comparisons
between different high level algorithmic
approaches to solving a common problem.
This is going to be especially true for
large inputs.
And remember as we discussed in some
sense, large inputs are the interesting
ones, those are the ones for
which we need algorithmic ingenuity.
For example, asymptotic analysis will
allow us to differentiate between better
and worse approaches to sorting.
Better and worse approaches to
multiplying two integers and so on.
Now most serious programmers
if you ask them,
what's the deal with
asymptotic analysis anyways?
They'll tell you reasonably,
that the main point is to suppress
both leading constant factors and
lower order terms.
Now, as we'll see, there's more asymptotic
analysis than just these seven words here.
But long term,
ten years from now if you only remember
seven words about asymptotic analysis,
I'll be reasonably happy if these
are the seven words that you remember.
So how do we justify adopting a formalism
which essentially by definition,
suppresses constant factors and
lower order terms?
Well lower order terms basically,
by definition, become increasingly
irrelevant as you focus on large inputs.
Which, as we've argued,
are the interesting inputs, the ones
where algorithmic ingenuity is important.
As far as constant factors,
these are going to be highly dependent on
the details of the environment,
the compiler, the language and so on.
So if we want to ignore those details,
it makes sense to have a formalism
which doesn't focus unduly
on leading constant factors.
Here's an example.
Remember when we analyzed
the merge sort algorithm,
we gave an upper bound on its running
time that was 6 times n log n plus 6n.
Where n was the input length,
the number of numbers in the input array.
So the lower order term here is the 6n.
That's growing more slowly than
than n log n, so we just drop that.
And then the leading constant factor
is the 6 so we suppress that as well.
After those two suppressions we're left
with a much simpler expression, n log n.
The terminology would then be to say that
the running time of merge sort is big O
of n log n.
So in other words,
when you say that an algorithm's
running time is big O of some function.
What you mean is that after you've
dropped the lower order terms, and
suppressed the leading constant factor,
you're left with the function f of n.
Intuitively, that is what
the big O notation means.
So to be clear,
I'm certainly not asserting thay
constant factors never matter when you're
designing and analyzing algorithms.
Rather, I'm just saying that
when you think about high level
algorithmic approaches, when you might
want to make a comparison between
fundamentally different
ways of solving a problem.
Asymptotic analysis is
often the right tool for
giving you guidance about which
one is going to perform better.
Especially on reasonably large inputs.
Now, once you've committed to
a particularly algorithmic solution to
a problem.
Of course, you might want to then work
harder to improve the leading constant
factor, perhaps even to
improve the lower order terms.
By all means if the future of your
start up depends on how efficiently you
implement some particular set
of lines of code, have at it.
Make it as fast as you can.
In the rest of this video I want to
go through four very simple examples.
In fact these examples are so simple,
if you have any experience with big O
notation, you're probably better off
just skipping the rest of this video.
And moving on to the mathematical
formalism that we begin in the next video.
But if you've never seen it before,
I hope these simple examples
will get you oriented.
So let's begin with a very basic problem,
searching an array for a given integer.
Let's analyze the straight
forward algorithm for
this problem where we just do
a linear scan through the array.
Checking each entry to see if
it is the desired integer t.
That is the code just checks
each array entry in turn.
If it ever finds the integer
t it returns TRUE.
If it falls off the end of the array
without finding it, it returns FALSE.
So what do you think?
We haven't formally defined
big O notation, but
I've given you an intuitive description.
What would you say is the running
time of this algorithm
as a function of the length of the array,
capital A?
So the answer I'm looking for
is C, big O of n.
Or equivalently we would say that the
running time of this algorithm is linear
in the input length n.
Why is that true?
Well let's think about how many operations
this piece of code is going to execute.
Actually the lines of code executed
is going to depend on the input.
It depends on whether or not the target
t is contained in the array A.
And if so, where in the array A it lies.
But, in the worst case this code
will do an unsuccessful search.
T will not be in the array and the code
will scan through the entire array A and
return FALSE.
The number of operations
then is a constant.
There is some initial setup, perhaps and
maybe it's an operation to return
this final bullying value.
But outside of that constant, which will
get suppressed in the big O notation,
it does a constant number of
operations per entry in the array.
And you can argue about
what the constant is,
if it's two, three, four operations
per entry point in the array.
But the point is, whatever that
constant is two, three, or four,
it gets conveniently suppressed
by the big O notation.
So as a result, the total number of
operations would be linear in n, and
so the big O notation will just be o of n.
So that was the first example.
In the last three examples,
I want to look at different ways
that we could have two loops.
And in this example, I want to think
about one loop followed by another, so
two loops in sequence.
I want to study almost the same
problem as the previous one.
Where now we are just given two arrays,
capital A and capital B,
let's say both are the same length.
And we want to know whether the target
t is in either one of them.
Again, we'll look at the straight forward
algorithm that we just searched through a.
And if we fail to find t and
a, we search through b.
If we don't find t and b either,
than we have to return return FALSE.
So the question then is exactly
the same as last time given this new,
longer piece of code.
What in big O notation
is it's running time?
Well, the question was the same and
in this case the answer was the same.
So this algorithm, just like the last one,
has running time big O of n.
If we actually count
the number of operations
of course it won't be exactly
the same as last time.
It'll be roughly twice as many operations
as the previous piece of code.
That's because we have to search two
different arrays each of link in.
So, whatever work we did before
we now do it twice as many times.
Of course that two being a constant.
Independent of the input length n,
is going to get suppressed once
we passed a big O notation.
So this, like the previous algorithm,
is a linear time algorithm,
it has running time big O of n.
Let's look at a more interesting
example of two loops,
where rather than processing each loop
in sequence, they're going to be nested.
In particular, let's look at the problem
of searching whether two given input
arrays each of link n,
contain a common number.
The code that we're going to look at for
solving this problem is the most
straight forward one you can imagine,
where we just compare all possibilities.
So for each index i into the array a,
each index j into the array b.
We just see a if A[i] is
the the same number as B[j].
If it is we return TRUE.
If we exhaust all of the possibilities
without ever finding equal elements,
then we're safe in returning a FALSE.
The question of course is in terms of
big O notation asymptotic analysis
as a function of the array length n, what
is the running time of this piece of code?
So this time the answer has changed.
For this piece of code the running
time is not big O with n, but
it is big O of n squared.
So, we might also called this
a quadratic time algorithm.
Because the running time is
quadratic in the input length n.
So, this is one of those kinds of
algorithms where if you double
the input link.
Then the running time of the algorithm
will go up by a factor of four
rather than by a factor of two,
like in the previous two pieces of code.
So why is this?
Why does it have quadratic
running time big O of n squared?
Well again,
there's some constant setup costs which
gets suppressed in the big O notation.
Again, for each fixed choice of an entry i
into array A and an index j for array B,
for each fixed choice of i and j, we
only do a constant number of operations.
The particular constants are relevant
because it gets suppressed in the big O
notation.
What's difference is that
there's a total of n squared
iterations of this double four loop.
In the first example we only had n
iterations of a single four loop.
In our second example because one four
loop completed before the second one
began we had only 2n iterations overall.
Here, for each of the n iterations
of the outer four loop,
we do n iterations of the inner four loop.
So that gives us the n times n,
ie n squared total iterations.
So that's going to be the running
time of this piece of code.
Lets wrap up with one final example,
it will again be nested four loops.
But this time we're going to be looking
for duplicates in a single array A.
Rather than needing to compare
two distinct arrays A and B.
So here's the piece of code we're going
to analyze for solving this problem, for
detecting whether or not the input
array A has duplicate entries.
There's only two small differences
relative to the code that
we went through on the previous slide
when we had two different arrays.
The first change won't surprise you at
all which is instead of referencing
the array B, I change that B to an A.
All right, so
I'm just going to compare the i th
entry of A with the j th entry of A.
The second change is
a little bit more subtle.
Which is I changed the inner for loops so
that the index j begins at i plus one.
Where i is the current value of
the outer four loop's index,
rather than starting at the index one.
I could have had it start at the index
one, that would still be correct, but
it would be wasteful and
you should think about why.
If we started the inner four loops index
at one, then this code would actually
compare each distinct pair of
elements of A to each other twice.
Which of course is silly.
You only need to compare two different
elements of A to each other once,
to know whether they're equal or not.
So this is the piece of code,
the question is the same as it always is.
What in terms of big O notation and
the input link n is the running
time of this piece of code?
So the answer to this question,
same as the last one, big O of n squared.
That is this piece of code is
also has quadratic running time.
So what I hope was clear was that whatever
the running time of this piece of code is.
It's proportional to the number of
iterations of this double four loop.
Like in all the examples,
we do constant work per iteration.
We don't care about the constant,
it gets suppressed by the Big O notation.
So all we gotta do is figure
out how many iterations there
are of this double for loop.
My claim is that there's
roughly n squared over two
iterations of this double four loop.
There's a couple ways to see that.
Informally we discussed how the difference
between this code and the previous one,
is that instead of counting something
twice, we're counting it once.
So that saves us a factor of two
in the number of iterations.
Of course, this one half factor gets
suppressed by the big O notation anyways.
So the big O running time doesn't change.
A different argument would just say,
there's one iteration for
every distinct choice of i and
j of indices between one and n.
And a simple counting
argument says that there's
n choose two such choices
of distinct i and j.
Where n choose two is the number
n times n minus one over two.
And again suppressing lower order
terms in the constant factor,
we still get a quadratic dependence
on the length of the input array A.
So that wraps up some of the sort
of just simple basic examples.
I hope this gets you oriented, you have
a strong intuitive sense, for what Big O
notation is trying to accomplish,
and how it's defined mathematically.
Let's now move on to both
the mathematical development and
some more interesting algorithms.